EML_2.2_annotations.md, before:

# Semantic Annotations in EML 2.2
Margaret O’Brien (EDI, SBC LTER), Steven Chong (NCEAS), Mark Schildhauer (NCEAS) 

Databits 2019 Spring

# Introduction

A semantic annotation is the attachment of semantic metadata to a resource. It provides precise 
definitions of concepts and clarifies the relationships between concepts in a computer-usable way. The process of 
creating semantic annotations may seem tedious, but the payoff is enhanced data retrieval and discovery. Semantic 
annotations will make it easier for others to find and reuse your data. 

For  example, if a dataset is annotated as being about "carbon dioxide flux" and another annotated with 
"CO2 flux" the information system should recognize that the datasets are about equivalent concepts. 
In another example, if you perform a search for datasets about "litter" (as in "plant litter"), the 
system will be able to disambiguate the term from the many meanings of "litter" (as in garbage, the grouping of 
animals born at the same time, etc.). Yet another example is if you search for datasets about "carbon flux", 
then datasets about "carbon dioxide flux" can also be returned because "carbon dioxide flux" is 
considered a type of "carbon flux". 

EML 2.2 will have the capacity to add semantic statements, as annotations to datasets 
(EML Development Committee, 2019). 
Here, we describe those features briefly and give examples of two common annotations - at the dataset-level
and attribute-level. The EML development committee is developing a Semantic Primer with greater details about creating annotations in EML.  It will be released along with other EML 2.2 documentation.


# Semantic Triples
Semantic annotations enable the creation of "triples", which are 3-part statements composed of
a **subject**, a **predicate** (that can be object properties or datatype properties), and an **object**.
```
[subject] [predicate] [object]
```
These components are analogous to the parts of a sentence; the **subject** and **object** can be thought of as nouns in the sentence and the **predicate** is akin to a verb or relationship that connects the **subject** and **object**. 
The semantic triple  expresses the statement about the associated resource. After processing the EML into a semantic web format, such as RDF/XML, the semantic statement becomes interpretable by machines. 

RDF is *not* designed to be displayed to people. It is designed so that components are accessible 
through the Web, for computers to look up precise definitions and relationships between these resources 
and other concepts. To simplify their use, the three components of a semantic triple should be 
HTTP URIs (uniform resource identifiers), which are 

- globally unique and persistent, and
- resolvable or dereferenceable

In addition to unique and non-ephemeral (URLs are considered ephemeral) the definition referenced by 
the URI should not change substantially, so that the resources referencing them may rely on their 
annotations remaining consistent and truthful.

The simplest triple statement is a sequence of (subject, predicate, object) terms, separated by whitespace and 
terminated by '.' (Prud'hommeaux & Carothers, 2014). Below is the semantic statement for the relationship 
between Spiderman and the Green Goblin, with fictional URIs:

```
<http://example.org/#spiderman> <http://example.org/#enemyOf> <http://example.org/#green-goblin> .
```

Below is a true triple created for a Jornada LTER dataset. The URIs resolve, to say that a 
dataset (subject) was "located in" (predicate/property) a "desert area" (object/value). The subject 
dereferences to a dataset in PASTA, knb-lter-jrn.210327001.1, the predicate to a relationship ontology 
which defines the spatial concept "located in", 
and the object to a concept in the Environment Ontology, which contains a complex definition and 
cross references for “desert area”. 

```
<https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/06db7b16fe62bcce4c43fd9ddbe43575> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0001025> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000097> .
```

The “located in” relationship means that more precise searches can be constructed, e.g. a computer can 
return this dataset alongside other datasets that are spatially "located in" a precisely defined area called a 
"desert" -- not just related to deserts in some unknown way, which is all that is possible with keywords. 

## Semantic Annotations in EML 2.2.0
In **EML 2.2.0** there are 5 places where annotation elements can appear in an EML document: 

- **top-level resource**  -- an `annotation` element is a child of `dataset`, `literature`, `software`, `protocol` 
- **entity-level** -- an `annotation` element is a child of a dataset's entity (e.g., `dataTable` )
- **attribute** -- an `annotation` element is a child of a dataset entity's `attribute` element
- **eml/annotations** -- a container for a group of `annotation` elements, using references
- **eml/additionalMetadata** -- `annotation` elements that reference a main-body element by its id

### Annotation element structure
All annotation nodes are defined as an XML type, so they have the same structure anywhere they appear
in the EML record. Here is the basic structure. Specific examples are below. The annotation node
holds the `predicate` and `object`; the `subject` of the semantic statement is the parent element of the 
annotation.

```xml
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="property label here">property URI here</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="value label here">value URI here</valueURI>
    </annotation>
```

#### Annotations map to semantic triples
The EML annotation is used to create semantic triples. The table below shows how the triple components 
`subject`, `predicate`, and `object` map to EML annotations using the JRN statement above. 

|Triple component|EML location |Note  |Example  |
|--|--|--|--|
| `subject` |Parent element of the annotation (element just above it in the XML "tree") |To be a subject, an element must have an `id` attribute | https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/06db7b16fe62bcce4c43fd9ddbe43575 |
| `predicate` | `//annotation/propertyURI`  |the "verb" in a statement | http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0001025  |
| `object` | `//annotation/valueURI` |"object" of the "verb"  | http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000097 |

**When are IDs required in the EML?**
Annotations at the dataset, entity or attribute level presume that the parent element is the *subject*; hence, 
if an element has an annotation child, an id is required, so that the element can become the subject of the triple.
Annotations using `eml/annotations` or `eml/additionalMetadata` will have 
subjects defined with a `references` attribute or `describes` element, so as for other internal EML 
references, an `id` is required.
The EML-2.2 parser checks for an `id` attribute on the parent element if an annotation is present. 

**Labels**: It is recommended that the label field of the annotation is populated by the value from the 
label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred label field (`skos:prefLabel`) from the referenced vocabulary.


### Example 1 - Resource level (top-level) annotations: `dataset`

The top-level resources in EML are `dataset`, `literature`, `protocol`, and `software`, and
any of them can be annotated. This example is for a dataset. **A top-level annotation applies 
to the entire resource (dataset)**.  The `annotation` element is 
the last element of the resource group (i.e., it appears right after `coverage`). 

- The *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element of the annotation, the dataset. It must have an `id="` attribute. 
- Each annotation consists of a `propertyURI` element and `valueURI` element, which define an *object property* and the *object* (value), respectively. 
- `propertyURI` and `valueURI` elements  
  - must have a `label` attribute that is suitable for application interfaces. 
  - should have URIs that point to terms in controlled vocabularies
- Labels should be populated from the label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred labels field (`skos:prefLabel`) in the referenced vocabulary.

In the following dataset annotation, 

- the *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element `dataset id="dataset-01"` (which in the resulting triple would use the  resolvable HTTP URI for the global ID for the dataset, that includes its DOI)
- the *object property* is "http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000136"
- the *object* (value)  is "http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_01000177"

Taken together, the semantic statement can be translated to "the dataset is about a grassland biome"

* Example 1: Top-level resource annotation (dataset)

```xml
<dataset id="dataset-01">
    <title>Data from Cedar Creek LTER on productivity and species richness for use in a workshop titled
    "An Analysis of the Relationship between Productivity and Diversity using Experimental Results from
    the Long-Term Ecological Research Network" held at NCEAS in September 1996.</title>
    <creator id="clarence.lehman">
        <individualName>
            <salutation>Mr.</salutation>
            <givenName>Clarence</givenName>
            <surName>Lehman</surName>
        </individualName>
    </creator>
    ...    
    <coverage> 
        ...
    </coverage>    
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="is about">http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000136</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="grassland biome">http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_01000177</valueURI>
    </annotation>
      ...    
</dataset>  
```



## Example 2 - Attribute-level annotations: `attribute` 

**An attribute annotation applies to the measurement or observation** in the data entity attribute, such as a column in a spreadsheet or table. 
It associates precise measurement semantics such as the feature or "thing" being measured, and the measurement standard or property for interpreting values for the attribute. The simplest annotation is a single reference to a complex measurement described in an ontology (as in this example).

An attribute annotation is an `annotation` element contained by an `attribute` element.  

- The *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element of the annotation, the `<attribute>`. The XML node must have an `id="`. 
- Each annotation consists of a `propertyURI` element and `valueURI` element, which define an *object property* and the *object* (value), respectively. 
- `propertyURI` and `valueURI` elements  
  - must have a `label` attribute that is suitable for application interfaces. 
  - should have URIs that point to terms in controlled vocabularies
- Labels should be populated from the label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred labels field (`skos:prefLabel`) in the referenced vocabulary.

In the following dataset annotation, 

- the *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element `attribute id="att.4"` (which in the resulting triple would be a fragment of the URI)
- the *object property* is "http://ecoinformatics.org/oboe/oboe.1.2/oboe-core.owl#containsMeasurementsOfType"
- the *object* (value)  is "http://purl.dataone.org/odo/ECSO_00001197" which resolves to the "Plant Cover Percentage" term in the ECSO Ontology (https://github.com/DataONEorg/sem-prov-ontologies/tree/master/observation). 


Taken together, the semantic statement indicates that "the dataset-attribute with the id 'att.4' contains measurements of type plant cover percentage".

* Example 2: attribute annotation

```xml
<attribute id="att.4">
    <attributeName>pctcov</attributeName>
    <attributeLabel>percent cover</attributeLabel>
    <attributeDefinition>The percent ground cover on the field</attributeDefinition>
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="contains measurements of type">http://ecoinformatics.org/oboe/oboe.1.2/oboe-core.owl#containsMeasurementsOfType</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="Plant Cover Percentage">http://purl.dataone.org/odo/ECSO_00001197</valueURI>
    </annotation>
</attribute>
```


### RDF Graphs 
Below is an example of how an annotation is converted to a graph of the RDF triple. 
The parts of a triple (subject, predicate, and object) become nodes and links in a graph.

![RDF graph A](RDF_graph.png "Graph from attribute annotation:")




# Conclusion
For complete documentation, see the EML Semantics Primer, which can be found with other EML documentation. It contains several more examples, and other RDF material for reference.
It is important to keep in mind that **Semantic statements are not simply a set of loosely structured keywords; they must be logically consistent**. Inconsistent annotations could have dreadful consequences.
So the primer will also have examples of how things can go wrong.

The professional scope of our occupation will continue to grow, adding both challenges and opportunities.
Communities like LTER and EDI will need to make decisions about what ontologies to adopt and priorities 
for applying them to their datasets, based on many aspects including (but not limited to) 
dataset importance, vocabularies' domain coverage, content, complexity, 
longevity and maintenance plans, plus their technical structure. This should be a joint venture, between
data managers (with scientific input), repositories, and the designers or maintainers of ontologies and
other vocabularies. 

As data managers, we will need to be able to 
understand the concepts in the ontologies chosen by our communities, in addition to the concepts 
in the datasets we manage, and to create logical annotations between the two. Concurrently, 
repository and other search-system managers will need mechanisms to interpret the implied 
subjects and create the RDF triples from EML annotations when needed. Repositories will need 
to provide mechanisms to navigate the structure of the ontologies chosen by their communities, 
and provide technical guidance to their communities as they choose ontologies and other vocabularies.


# References

Prud'hommeaux E. and G. Carothers. 2014. W3C Recommendation: RDF 1.1 Turtle. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-turtle-20140225 (accessed 2019-03-15)

EML Development Committee. 2019 https://github.com/NCEAS/eml (accessed 2019-03-15)

Commit message:

changed located_in example to is_about, for JRN

EML_2.2_annotations.md, after:

# Semantic Annotations in EML 2.2
Margaret O’Brien (EDI, SBC LTER), Steven Chong (NCEAS), Mark Schildhauer (NCEAS) 

Databits 2019 Spring

# Introduction

A semantic annotation is the attachment of semantic metadata to a resource. It provides precise 
definitions of concepts and clarifies the relationships between concepts in a computer-usable way. The process of 
creating semantic annotations may seem tedious, but the payoff is enhanced data retrieval and discovery. Semantic 
annotations will make it easier for others to find and reuse your data. 

For  example, if a dataset is annotated as being about "carbon dioxide flux" and another annotated with 
"CO2 flux" the information system should recognize that the datasets are about equivalent concepts. 
In another example, if you perform a search for datasets about "litter" (as in "plant litter"), the 
system will be able to disambiguate the term from the many meanings of "litter" (as in garbage, the grouping of 
animals born at the same time, etc.). Yet another example is if you search for datasets about "carbon flux", 
then datasets about "carbon dioxide flux" can also be returned because "carbon dioxide flux" is 
considered a type of "carbon flux". 

EML 2.2 will have the capacity to add semantic statements, as annotations to datasets 
(EML Development Committee, 2019). 
Here, we describe those features briefly and give examples of two common annotations - at the dataset-level
and attribute-level. The EML development committee is developing a Semantic Primer with greater details about creating annotations in EML.  It will be released along with other EML 2.2 documentation.


# Semantic Triples
Semantic annotations enable the creation of "triples", which are 3-part statements composed of
a **subject**, a **predicate** (that can be object properties or datatype properties), and an **object**.
```
[subject] [predicate] [object]
```
These components are analogous to the parts of a sentence; the **subject** and **object** can be thought of as nouns in the sentence and the **predicate** is akin to a verb or relationship that connects the **subject** and **object**. 
The semantic triple  expresses the statement about the associated resource. After processing the EML into a semantic web format, such as RDF/XML, the semantic statement becomes interpretable by machines. 

RDF is *not* designed to be displayed to people. It is designed so that components are accessible 
through the Web, for computers to look up precise definitions and relationships between these resources 
and other concepts. To simplify their use, the three components of a semantic triple should be 
HTTP URIs (uniform resource identifiers), which are 

- globally unique and persistent, and
- resolvable or dereferenceable

In addition to unique and non-ephemeral (URLs are considered ephemeral) the definition referenced by 
the URI should not change substantially, so that the resources referencing them may rely on their 
annotations remaining consistent and truthful.

The simplest triple statement is a sequence of (subject, predicate, object) terms, separated by whitespace and 
terminated by '.' (Prud'hommeaux & Carothers, 2014). Below is the semantic statement for the relationship 
between Spiderman and the Green Goblin, with fictional URIs:

```
<http://example.org/#spiderman> <http://example.org/#enemyOf> <http://example.org/#green-goblin> .
```

Below is a true triple created for a Jornada LTER dataset. The URIs resolve, to say that a 
dataset (subject) "is about" (predicate/property) a "desert area" (object/value). The subject 
dereferences to a dataset in PASTA, knb-lter-jrn.210327001.1, the predicate to a relationship ontology 
which defines the concept "is about", 
and the object to a concept in the Environment Ontology, which contains a complex definition and 
cross references for “desert area”. 

```
<https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/06db7b16fe62bcce4c43fd9ddbe43575> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000136> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000097> .
```

The “is about” relationship means that more precise searches can be constructed, e.g. a computer can 
return this dataset alongside other datasets that are "about" a precisely defined area called a 
"desert" -- not just related to deserts in some unknown way, which is all that is possible with keywords. 

## Semantic Annotations in EML 2.2.0
In **EML 2.2.0** there are 5 places where annotation elements can appear in an EML document: 

- **top-level resource**  -- an `annotation` element is a child of `dataset`, `literature`, `software`, `protocol` 
- **entity-level** -- an `annotation` element is a child of a dataset's entity (e.g., `dataTable` )
- **attribute** -- an `annotation` element is a child of a dataset entity's `attribute` element
- **eml/annotations** -- a container for a group of `annotation` elements, using references
- **eml/additionalMetadata** -- `annotation` elements that reference a main-body element by its id

### Annotation element structure
All annotation nodes are defined as an XML type, so they have the same structure anywhere they appear
in the EML record. Here is the basic structure. Specific examples are below. The annotation node
holds the `predicate` and `object`; the `subject` of the semantic statement is the parent element of the 
annotation.

```xml
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="property label here">property URI here</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="value label here">value URI here</valueURI>
    </annotation>
```

#### Annotations map to semantic triples
The EML annotation is used to create semantic triples. The table below shows how the triple components 
`subject`, `predicate`, and `object` map to EML annotations using the JRN statement above. 

|Triple component|EML location |Note  |Example  |
|--|--|--|--|
| `subject` |Parent element of the annotation (element just above it in the XML "tree") |To be a subject, an element must have an `id` attribute | https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/06db7b16fe62bcce4c43fd9ddbe43575 |
| `predicate` | `//annotation/propertyURI`  |the "verb" in a statement | http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0001025  |
| `object` | `//annotation/valueURI` |"object" of the "verb"  | http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000097 |

**When are IDs required in the EML?**
Annotations at the dataset, entity or attribute level presume that the parent element is the *subject*; hence, 
if an element has an annotation child, an id is required, so that the element can become the subject of the triple.
Annotations using `eml/annotations` or `eml/additionalMetadata` will have 
subjects defined with a `references` attribute or `describes` element, so as for other internal EML 
references, an `id` is required.
The EML-2.2 parser checks for an `id` attribute on the parent element if an annotation is present. 

**Labels**: It is recommended that the label field of the annotation is populated by the value from the 
label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred label field (`skos:prefLabel`) from the referenced vocabulary.


### Example 1 - Resource level (top-level) annotations: `dataset`

The top-level resources in EML are `dataset`, `literature`, `protocol`, and `software`, and
any of them can be annotated. This example is for a dataset. **A top-level annotation applies 
to the entire resource (dataset)**.  The `annotation` element is 
the last element of the resource group (i.e., it appears right after `coverage`). 

- The *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element of the annotation, the dataset. It must have an `id="` attribute. 
- Each annotation consists of a `propertyURI` element and `valueURI` element, which define an *object property* and the *object* (value), respectively. 
- `propertyURI` and `valueURI` elements  
  - must have a `label` attribute that is suitable for application interfaces. 
  - should have URIs that point to terms in controlled vocabularies
- Labels should be populated from the label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred labels field (`skos:prefLabel`) in the referenced vocabulary.

In the following dataset annotation, 

- the *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element `dataset id="dataset-01"` (which in the resulting triple would use the  resolvable HTTP URI for the global ID for the dataset, that includes its DOI)
- the *object property* is "http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000136"
- the *object* (value)  is "http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_01000177"

Taken together, the semantic statement can be translated to "the dataset is about a grassland biome"

* Example 1: Top-level resource annotation (dataset)

```xml
<dataset id="dataset-01">
    <title>Data from Cedar Creek LTER on productivity and species richness for use in a workshop titled
    "An Analysis of the Relationship between Productivity and Diversity using Experimental Results from
    the Long-Term Ecological Research Network" held at NCEAS in September 1996.</title>
    <creator id="clarence.lehman">
        <individualName>
            <salutation>Mr.</salutation>
            <givenName>Clarence</givenName>
            <surName>Lehman</surName>
        </individualName>
    </creator>
    ...    
    <coverage> 
        ...
    </coverage>    
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="is about">http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000136</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="grassland biome">http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_01000177</valueURI>
    </annotation>
      ...    
</dataset>  
```



## Example 2 - Attribute-level annotations: `attribute` 

**An attribute annotation applies to the measurement or observation** in the data entity attribute, such as a column in a spreadsheet or table. 
It associates precise measurement semantics such as the feature or "thing" being measured, and the measurement standard or property for interpreting values for the attribute. The simplest annotation is a single reference to a complex measurement described in an ontology (as in this example).

An attribute annotation is an `annotation` element contained by an `attribute` element.  

- The *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element of the annotation, the `<attribute>`. The XML node must have an `id="`. 
- Each annotation consists of a `propertyURI` element and `valueURI` element, which define an *object property* and the *object* (value), respectively. 
- `propertyURI` and `valueURI` elements  
  - must have a `label` attribute that is suitable for application interfaces. 
  - should have URIs that point to terms in controlled vocabularies
- Labels should be populated from the label field (`rdfs:label`) or preferred labels field (`skos:prefLabel`) in the referenced vocabulary.

In the following dataset annotation, 

- the *subject* of the semantic statement is the parent element `attribute id="att.4"` (which in the resulting triple would be a fragment of the URI)
- the *object property* is "http://ecoinformatics.org/oboe/oboe.1.2/oboe-core.owl#containsMeasurementsOfType"
- the *object* (value)  is "http://purl.dataone.org/odo/ECSO_00001197" which resolves to the "Plant Cover Percentage" term in the ECSO Ontology (https://github.com/DataONEorg/sem-prov-ontologies/tree/master/observation). 


Taken together, the semantic statement indicates that "the dataset-attribute with the id 'att.4' contains measurements of type plant cover percentage".

* Example 2: attribute annotation

```xml
<attribute id="att.4">
    <attributeName>pctcov</attributeName>
    <attributeLabel>percent cover</attributeLabel>
    <attributeDefinition>The percent ground cover on the field</attributeDefinition>
    <annotation>
        <propertyURI label="contains measurements of type">http://ecoinformatics.org/oboe/oboe.1.2/oboe-core.owl#containsMeasurementsOfType</propertyURI>
        <valueURI label="Plant Cover Percentage">http://purl.dataone.org/odo/ECSO_00001197</valueURI>
    </annotation>
</attribute>
```


### RDF Graphs 
Below is an example of how an annotation is converted to a graph of the RDF triple. 
The parts of a triple (subject, predicate, and object) become nodes and links in a graph.

![RDF graph A](RDF_graph.png "Graph from attribute annotation:")




# Conclusion
For complete documentation, see the EML Semantics Primer, which can be found with other EML documentation. It contains several more examples, and other RDF material for reference.
It is important to keep in mind that **Semantic statements are not simply a set of loosely structured keywords; they must be logically consistent**. Inconsistent annotations could have dreadful consequences.
So the primer will also have examples of how things can go wrong.

The professional scope of our occupation will continue to grow, adding both challenges and opportunities.
Communities like LTER and EDI will need to make decisions about what ontologies to adopt and priorities 
for applying them to their datasets, based on many aspects including (but not limited to) 
dataset importance, vocabularies' domain coverage, content, complexity, 
longevity and maintenance plans, plus their technical structure. This should be a joint venture, between
data managers (with scientific input), repositories, and the designers or maintainers of ontologies and
other vocabularies. 

As data managers, we will need to be able to 
understand the concepts in the ontologies chosen by our communities, in addition to the concepts 
in the datasets we manage, and to create logical annotations between the two. Concurrently, 
repository and other search-system managers will need mechanisms to interpret the implied 
subjects and create the RDF triples from EML annotations when needed. Repositories will need 
to provide mechanisms to navigate the structure of the ontologies chosen by their communities, 
and provide technical guidance to their communities as they choose ontologies and other vocabularies.


# References

Prud'hommeaux E. and G. Carothers. 2014. W3C Recommendation: RDF 1.1 Turtle. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-turtle-20140225 (accessed 2019-03-15)

EML Development Committee. 2019 https://github.com/NCEAS/eml (accessed 2019-03-15)
